Let $(\Omega, \mathcal{F}, \Pr)$ be a probability space.
Let $E$ be a $\sigma$-algebra over a set $D$.
Then any measurable function $X: \Omega \mapsto D$
is said to be a random variable with support $D$.

For $S \in E$, define $X^{-1}(E) = \{\omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in S\}$
and define $\Pr(X \in S) = \Pr(X^{-1}(S))$.
Define $\Pr_X: E \mapsto [0, 1]$ as $\Pr_X(S) = \Pr(X \in S)$.
$\Pr_X$ is called the probability distribution of $X$.

## Probability space of probability distribution

**Theorem**: $(D, E, \Pr_X)$ is a probability space.

**Proof**:

* Non-negativity is trivial to prove.
* $X^{-1}(D) = \Omega$, so $\Pr_X(D) = 1$.
* $\Pr_X(\{\}) = \Pr(\{\omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \in \{\}\}) = P(\{\}) = 0$.
* $\sigma$-additivity:
Let $S$ be a countable set of pairwise-disjoint sets from $D$.
Since $X$ is a function, $S' = \{X^{-1}(A): A \in S\}$ is also a countable set of pairwise-disjoint sets.
Also, $S' \subseteq \mathcal{F}$.
\begin{align}
\Pr_X\left(\bigcup_{A \in S} A\right)
&= \Pr\left(X^{-1}\left(\bigcup_{A \in S} A\right)\right)
\\ &= \Pr\left(\bigcup_{A \in S} X^{-1}(A)\right)
\\ &= \sum_{A \in S} \Pr(X^{-1}(A))
\\ &= \sum_{A \in S} \Pr_X(A) \tag*{$\square$}
\end{align}
Therefore, $\Pr_X$ is a probability measure over $(D, E)$.

## Totally-ordered random variables

If $D$ is totally-ordered, then the cumulative distribution function (CDF)
$F_X: D \mapsto [0, 1]$ of a random variable $X$ is defined as
$F_X(x) = \Pr(X \le x) = \Pr(\{\omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) \le x\})$.
Therefore, $F_X$ is a non-decreasing function.
It is easy to see that $\Pr(X > x) = 1 - F_X(x)$.

When $D$ is totally ordered, for a sequence $X = [X_1, X_2, \ldots, X_n]$ of random variables,
the joint CDF of $X$ is defined as
\[ F_X(x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n) = \Pr(X_1 \le x_1 \cap X_2 \le x_2 \cap \ldots \cap X_n \le x_n) \]

When $E = \sigma(\{\{y \in D: y \le x\}: x \in D\})$,
$F_X$ completely characterizes $\Pr_X$.

## Discrete random variables

When $D$ is countable, $X$ is called a discrete random variable.

The probability mass function $f_X: D \mapsto [0, 1]$
of a discrete random variable $X$ is defined as
$f_X(x) = \Pr(X = x) = \Pr(\{\omega \in \Omega: X(\omega) = x\})$.
The probability mass function is sometimes also called the distribution function.

For a sequence $X = [X_1, X_2, \ldots, X_n]$ of random variables,
the joint probability mass function of $X$ is defined as
\[ f_X(x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n) = \Pr(X_1 = x_1 \cap X_2 = x_2 \cap \ldots \cap X_n = x_n) \]

When $E$ is the power-set of $D$, $f_X$ completely characterizes $\Pr_X$.

## Continuous random variables

Let $X$ be a random variable with support $\mathbb{R}$.

Suppose there exists a function $f_X: \mathbb{R} \mapsto \mathbb{R}_{\ge 0}$ such that
\[ F_X(x) = \int_{-\infty}^x f_X(x) dx \]
Then $f_X(x)$ is called the probability density function (PDF) of $X$
and $X$ is said to be a continuous random variable.

$f_X(x)$ is sometimes denoted as $\mathrm{d}\Pr(x \le X \le x+\mathrm{d}x)/\mathrm{d}x$.

Since the $\sigma$-algebra generated by sets of the form $(-\infty, a]$
is $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$, $E$ is often chosen to be $\mathcal{B}(\mathbb{R})$
so that $F_X$ completely characterizes $\Pr_X$.
If $X$ is a continuous random variable, this would mean that $f_X$
completely characterizes $\Pr_X$.

Let $X = [X_1, X_2, \ldots, X_n]$ be a sequence of random variables.
Suppose there exists a function $f_X: \mathbb{R}^n \mapsto \mathbb{R}_{\ge 0}$ such that
\[ F_X(x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n)
= \int_{-\infty}^{x_1} \int_{-\infty}^{x_2} \ldots \int_{-\infty}^{x_n}
f_X(x_1, x_2, \ldots, x_n) dx_1 dx_2 \ldots dx_n \]
Then $f_X$ is called the probability density function (PDF) of $X$
and $X$ is said to be a multivariate continuous random variable.
